Skip to main contentSkip to article
Elsevier logo

Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (47)
Cited by (439)
Elsevier
The Journal of Socio-Economics
Volume 35, Issue 2, April 2006, Pages 326-347
The Journal of Socio-Economics
Does marriage make people happy, or do happy people get married?
Author links open overlay panelAlois Stutzer 1, Bruno S. Frey 1
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socec.2005.11.043
Get rights and content
Abstract
This paper analyzes the causal relationships between marriage and subjective well-being in a longitudinal data set spanning 17 years. We find evidence that happier singles opt more likely for marriage and that there are large differences in the benefits from marriage between couples. Potential, as well as actual, division of labor seems to contribute to spouses’ well-being, especially for women and when there is a young family to raise. In contrast, large differences in the partners’ educational level have a negative effect on experienced life satisfaction.

Introduction
Marriage is one of the most important institutions affecting people's life and well-being. Marital institutions regulate sexual relations and encourage commitment between spouses. This commitment has positive effects, for instance on spouses’ health and their earnings on the labor market.

In this paper, we directly look at the effect of marriage on spouses’ happiness as measured in an extensive panel survey, the German Socio-Economic Panel, with data on reported subjective well-being. This allows us to analyze whether marriage makes people happy, or whether happy people are more likely to get married. We want to go beyond the numerous previous studies that document that married people are happier than singles and those living in cohabitation (e.g., Myers, 1999). We have two main interests in this paper: one goal is to provide systematic evidence on who benefits more and who benefits less from marriage. This evidence helps in assessing the crucial auxiliary assumption in models of the marriage market. Becker, 1973, Becker, 19741 is based on the gains married people get from household production and labor division. Other theories focus on spouses’ joint consumption of household public goods or on reciprocity and social equality in homogamous2 relationships. In the latter case, it is argued that the tendency for “like to marry like” facilitates compatibility of spouses’ basic values and beliefs. Our empirical analysis studies whether couples with different degrees of potential and actual specialization of labor and more or less difference in education systematically differ in their benefits from marriage.

It is not our intent to recommend whether people should or should not marry. Rather, we intend to contribute to the public discussion about the value of intact marriages and legislators’ debates about marriage penalties in tax codes, or the effect of welfare programs and social security on marriage. Moreover, empirical evidence on different couples’ utility levels helps us to better understand the sources of well-being in marriage. The empirical analysis is challenged by the question of causality. Does marriage make people happier or is marriage just more likely for happier people? The second goal of our analysis is to address the question of selection. So far, there is no large-scale evidence on the role of selection in the relation between marriage and happiness. In a longitudinal data set, we compare singles who remain single with singles who marry later as well as with people who are already married.

In a panel spanning a period of 17 years, we find that selection of happier people into marriage is pronounced for those who marry when they are young and again becomes an important factor for those who marry later in life. Moreover, a retrospective evaluation shows that those who get divorced were already less happy when they were newly married and when they were still single. This indicates substantial selection effects of generally less happy individuals into the group of divorced people.

In order to study the differences in benefits from marriage, we restrict our analysis to people who got married during the 17 years of the sampling period. The results show that there are large differences in the benefits of marriage between couples. Moreover, most of the extra benefits in reported well-being are experienced during the first few years of marriage. Potential, as well as actual, division of labor seems to contribute to spouses’ well-being, especially for women and when there is a young family to raise. In contrast, above median differences in partners’ education level has a negative effect on experienced life satisfaction compared to those couples with small differences.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduction to previous research on marriage and well-being and outlines the research questions. The empirical analysis is conducted in Section 3. The first subsection presents the panel data for the analysis and introduces the empirical approach. The second subsection deals with the question of selection into marriage. In Section 3.3, the differences in the benefits of marriage are studied. Section 4 offers concluding remarks.

Section snippets
The effects of marriage on spouses’ well-being
With marriage, people engage in a long-term relationship with a strong commitment to a mutually rewarding exchange. Spouses expect some benefits from the partner's expressed love, gratitude and recognition as well as from security and material rewards. This is summarized in the protection perspective of marriage. From the protective effects, economists have, in particular, studied the financial benefits of marriage. Marriage provides basic insurance against adverse life events and allows gains

Data and empirical approach
In economics, the welfare effects of marriage have so far mainly been studied in terms of its effects on income. Here we use a much broader concept of individual well-being. We directly study spouses’ level of utility and use reported subjective well-being as a proxy measure.5

Concluding remarks
Marriage is a fundamental institution in society. In this paper, we employ data on people's reported subjective well-being in order to study this institution. Knowledge about spouses’ happiness or life satisfaction complements research on the effects of marriage on people's health and income. Insights from these analyses may contribute to the public discussion about the value of intact marriages and legislators’ debates about marriage penalties in tax codes or the effect of welfare programs and 

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Hans-Jürgen Andress, Phil Cowan, Lorenz Götte, John Gottman, Arlie Hochschild, Reto Jegen, Ruut Veenhoven and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. The first author gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation. Data for the German Socio-Economic Panel has been kindly provided by the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) in Berlin.

References (47)
D.G. Blanchflower et al.
Well-being over time in Britain and the USA
Journal of Public Economics
(2004)
S.R. Tynes
Educational heterogamy and marital satisfaction between spouses
Social Science Research
(1990)
G.E. Weisfeld et al.
Correlates of satisfaction in british marriages
Ethology and Sociobiology
(1992)
M. Argyle
Causes and correlates of happiness
G.S. Becker
A theory of marriage. Part I
Journal of Political Economy
(1973)
G.S. Becker
A theory of marriage. Part II
Journal of Political Economy
(1974)
G.S. Becker
A Treatise on the Family
(1981)
M. Brien et al.
The economics of marriage and household formation
B. Burman et al.
Analysis of the association between marital relationships and health problems: an interactional perspective
Psychological Bulletin
(1992)
H. Chun et al.
Why do married men earn more: productivity or marriage selection?
Economic Inquiry
(2001)
View more references
Cited by (439)
Valuing urban nature through life satisfaction: The consistency of GIS and survey indicators of nature
2023, Resource and Energy Economics
Show abstract
Valuation of subjective wellbeing and the role of marital status: Linear versus ordinal estimators
2023, Economic Modelling
Show abstract
Hotel employees' knowledge of monkeypox's source, symptoms, transmission, prevention, and treatment in Egypt
2023, Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease
Show abstract
Singles and mental health
2023, Encyclopedia of Mental Health, Third Edition: Volume 1-3
Show abstract
Should bads be inflicted all at once, like Machiavelli said? Evidence from life-satisfaction data
2023, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
Show abstract
The impact of COVID-19 on the intention of third-child in China: an empirical analysis based on survey data
2023, BMC Public Health
View all citing articles on Scopus
1
Both authors are also associated with CREMA, Center for Research in Economics, Management and the Arts. The first author is also affiliated with IZA, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.

View full text
Copyright © 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Part of special issue
The Socio-Economics of Happiness
Edited by Paul Anand
Other articles from this issue
Symposium introduction: Life satisfaction and welfare economics
April 2006
Paul Anand, Andrew Clark
The (unexpected) structure of “rents” on the French and British labour markets
April 2006
Andrew E. Clark, Claudia Senik
Parental separation and well-being of youths: Evidence from Germany
April 2006
Rainer Winkelmann
View more articles

Recommended articles
Why did they not get married? Biological, economic and family determinants of celibacy in rural Spain (1785–2010)
Investigaciones de Historia Económica, Volume 14, Issue 3, 2018, pp. 140-153
Francisco J. Marco-Gracia
Trends in singlehood in young adulthood in Europe
Advances in Life Course Research, Volume 51, 2022, Article 100449
Lonneke van den Berg, Ellen Verbakel
Marital status as a predictor of diurnal salivary cortisol levels and slopes in a community sample of healthy adults
Psychoneuroendocrinology, Volume 78, 2017, pp. 68-75
Brian Chin, …, Sheldon Cohen
Show 3 more articles

Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
413
Policy Citations:
56
Captures
Readers:
493
Mentions
Blog Mentions:
3
News Mentions:
19
References:
2
Social Media
Shares, Likes & Comments:
172
plumX logoView details
Elsevier logo with wordmark
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.

All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.

RELX group home page