Skip to main contentSkip to article
Elsevier logo

Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (96)
Cited by (37)
Elsevier
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
Volume 80, September 2017, Pages 622-629
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
Review article
Affordances and neuroscience: Steps towards a successful marriage
Author links open overlay panelMatthieu M. de Wit a, Simon de Vries b, John van der Kamp c, Rob Withagen b
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.07.008
Get rights and content
Abstract
The concept of affordance is rapidly gaining popularity in neuroscientific accounts of perception and action. This concept was introduced by James Gibson to refer to the action possibilities of the environment. By contrast, standard cognitive neuroscience typically uses the concept to refer to (action-oriented) representations in the brain. This paper will show that the view of affordances as representations firmly places the concept in the subject-object framework that dominates both psychology and neuroscience. Notably, Gibson introduced the affordance concept to overcome this very framework. We describe an account of the role of the brain in perception and action that is consistent with Gibson. Making use of neuroscientific findings of neural reuse, degeneracy and functional connectivity, we conceptualize neural regions in the brain as dispositional parts of perceptual and action systems that temporarily assemble to enable animals to directly perceive and – in the paradigmatic case – utilize the affordances of the environment.

Introduction
Over the last two decades, an increasing number of cognitive neuroscientists has adopted the concept of affordance in their attempts to understand the role of the brain in action and the perception of (higher-order properties of) manipulable objects such as tools (e.g., Bach et al., 2014; Buccino et al., 2009; Cisek, 2007; Evans et al., 2016; Fagg and Arbib, 1998; Jeannerod, 1994; Kühn et al., 2014; Makris et al., 2013; Proverbio et al., 2013; Sakreida et al., 2016; Valyear et al., 2012). The ecological psychologist James Gibson originally introduced this concept to refer to the action possibilities of the environment that are available to an animal. For example, for most human-beings a chair affords sitting, a glass affords grasping, water affords drinking, and the floor affords walking across. However, when using the concept of affordance, cognitive neuroscientists typically do not refer to the action possibilities of the environment, but instead refer to (action-oriented) representations or dispositions in the brain (see e.g., Sakreida et al., 2016). In the present paper, we first show how this approach both fails to do justice to as well as exploit the power of Gibson’s theoretical framework, and then sketch in bold strokes what a genuine Gibsonian neuroscience would look like.

We will start with a discussion of three influential neuroscientific accounts in which the concept of affordance is used, and transformed. We will then elaborate on how Gibson introduced the term affordance to overcome the subject-object framework that dominated psychology, and on how standard cognitive neuroscience, with its central reliance on representation and computation, firmly places the affordance concept back within this subject-object framework (see also Dotov et al., 2012). Capitalizing on Gibson’s (1966) theory of perceptual systems, Anderson’s (2014) recent theory of neural reuse, and reports of degeneracy in the brain (e.g., Noppeney et al., 2004), we will end with a discussion of a neuroscientific account of affordances that does do justice to Gibson’s theoretical framework. It will be argued that brain regions are parts of perceptual and action systems that provide animals with the capacity to directly perceive and utilize affordances.

Section snippets
Affordances in standard cognitive neuroscience
The concept of affordance is often used in neuroscientific accounts, and not always incorrectly (see e.g., Anderson, 2014, Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014, Reed, 1996). However, in this section we will limit ourselves to influential accounts, exemplary of standard cognitive neuroscience, that use the concept of affordance in ways that are not in line with the traditional Gibsonian notion.1

Gibson’s ecological program
The above discussions of the role of the brain in action selection and grasping emphasize that perception and action representations are intimately linked, and perhaps not even separable in a meaningful way (e.g., Cisek, 2007). However, in developing his ecological approach, Gibson’s intention was not simply to couple perception and action, but to overcome the subject-object framework that had dominated psychology from the mechanization of the worldview onwards.

In the 17th century, Galileo and

What does a Gibsonian neuroscience look like?
Gibson’s theories of affordances and of information led him to a different view of the role of the brain in perceiving and acting. Since the late 17th century the brain has been thought of as the control system of the body (e.g., Martensen, 2004, Zimmer, 2004). However, if action is guided by information, the brain should no longer be conceived as an organ that controls the body. As Gibson put it, “[l]ocomotion and manipulation […] are controlled not by the brain, but by information […].

Concluding remarks
In this paper, we have shown how cognitive neuroscientists increasingly make use of Gibson’s concept of affordance when discussing the role of the brain in perception and action. Under the influence of Jeannerod (e.g., 1994), the concept has typically been used to refer to (action-oriented) representations in the brain, reinstating the distinction between subject and object that has held psychology captive since the 17th century. We explained in detail how this use of the concept is neither in

References (96)
M.L. Anderson et al.
Describing functional diversity of brain regions and brain networks
Neuroimage
(2013)
P. Bach-y-Rita et al.
Sensory substitution and the human-machine interface
Trends Cogn. Sci.
(2003)
G.P. Bingham
Task-specific devices and the perceptual bottleneck
Hum. Mov. Sci.
(1988)
G. Buccino et al.
Broken affordances, broken objects: a TMS study
Neuropsychologia
(2009)
S.H. Creem-Regehr et al.
Neural representations of graspable objects: are tools special?
Cogn. Brain Res.
(2005)
A.K. Engel et al.
Where’s the action? The pragmatic turn in cognitive science
Trends Cogn. Sci.
(2013)
A.H. Fagg et al.
Modeling parietal-premotor interactions in primate control of grasping
Neural Netw.
(1998)
J.M. Franchak et al.
Learning by doing: action performance facilitates affordance perception
Vis. Res.
(2010)
J.M. Fuster
The module: crisis of a paradigm
Neuron
(2000)
J. Grèzes et al.
Does visual perception of object afford action? Evidence from a neuroimaging study
Neuropsychologia
(2002)
View more references
Cited by (37)
On natural attunement: Shared rhythms between the brain and the environment
2023, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
Show abstract
Wild brains: The value of neuroethological approaches in preclinical behavioral neuroscience animal models
2023, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
Show abstract
Influence of colour on object motor representation
2022, Neuropsychologia
Show abstract
Tool use and function knowledge shape visual object processing
2021, Biological Psychology
Citation Excerpt :
Affordances can also be learned through our everyday usage of objects and tools. In the last decade, affordance processing has been highly investigated in cognitive neuroscience using neuroimaging techniques (de Wit, de Vries, van der Kamp, & Withagen, 2017; Reynaud, Lesourd, Navarro, & Osiurak, 2016; Sakreida et al., 2016; Thill, Caligiore, Borghi, Ziemke, & Baldassarre, 2013). fMRI analysis unveiled the neuronal networks involved in the perception of and action triggered by the affordances during object recognition (Brandi, Wohlschlager, Sorg, & Hermsdorfer, 2014; Buxbaum, Kyle, Tang, & Detre, 2006; Mizelle, Kelly, & Wheaton, 2013; Sakreida et al., 2016; Tettamanti, Conca, Falini, & Perani, 2017).

Show abstract
A distinction concerning vision-for-action and affordance perception
2021, Consciousness and Cognition
Citation Excerpt :
In the recent twenty years, scholars from different research fields have endorsed the notion that one of the main functions of vision is the guidance of action. This means, it is suggested, that one of the main functions of vision is to detect action possibilities, i.e. possibilities of motor interaction we can have with objects in the environment (for a recent review see Sakreida et al., 2016; de Wit, de Vries, van der Kamp, & Withagen, 2017; Osiurak et al., 2017; Ferretti & Zipoli Caiani, 2019b; Ferretti, 2019, 2020a, forthcoming). In this respect, several speculations, involving both philosophers and neuroscientists, have been devoted to an understanding of the real nature of the special relation that binds motor and visual processes.

Show abstract
Probing the neural representations of body-related stimuli: A reply to Tamè &amp; Longo's commentary
2021, Cortex
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Recommended articles
Electrophysiological study of action-affordance priming between object names
Brain and Language, Volume 184, 2018, pp. 20-31
Isabel M. Feven-Parsons, Jeremy Goslin
Action affordances and visuo-spatial complexity in motor imagery: An fMRI study
Brain and Cognition, Volume 124, 2018, pp. 37-46
Laura Schulz, …, Gernot R. Müller-Putz
Multiscale modeling and analytical methods in neuroscience: Molecules, neural circuits, cognition and brain disorders
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, Volume 359, 2021, Article 109225
KongFatt Wong-Lin, …, Alok Joshi
Show 3 more articles

Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
37
Captures
Readers:
119
plumX logoView details
Elsevier logo with wordmark
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.

All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.

RELX group home page