
1
First Marriage Dissolution, Divorce, and Remarriage:
United States
Matthew D. Bramlett, Ph.D., and William D. Mosher, Ph.D., Division of Vital Statistics
Abstract
Objectives—This report presents national estimates of the duration of first and
second marriages for women 15–44 years of age in 1995. National estimates of the
probability of divorce given separation and of the probability of remarriage given
divorce are also presented.
Methods—The life- table estimates are based on a nationally representative
sample of women 15–44 years of age in the United States in 1995 from the
National Survey of Family Growth, Cycle 5.
Results—One fifth of first marriages end within 5 years and one third end
within 10 years. First marriages of teenagers disrupt faster than the first marriages
of women who were ages 20 years and older at marriage. First marriages of black
non-Hispanic women dissolve at a faster rate: 47 percent end within 10 years
compared with 34 percent for Hispanic, 32 percent for white non-Hispanic, and
20 percent for Asian non-Hispanic women. Virtually all separations among white
non-Hispanic women (98 percent) end in divorce within 6 years, compared with
only 80 percent of separations among Hispanic women and 72 percent of
separations among black non-Hispanic women.
Women under age 25 years at divorce are more likely to remarry than women
at least age 25 years at divorce. White non-Hispanic and Hispanic women are much
more likely to remarry than black non-Hispanic women. White non-Hispanic
women are slightly more likely than Hispanic women to remarry. The data suggest
that women who remarry before age 25 years are more likely to experience a
second marital disruption than women who remarry at ages older than 25 years,
although the difference is only significant at late marital durations. Black non-
Hispanic remarriages are more likely to disrupt than Hispanic or white non-Hispanic
remarriages.
Keywords: marriage c separation c divorce c remarriage
Introduction
Marriage is associated with a
variety of positive outcomes, and
dissolution of marriage is associated
with negative outcomes for men,
women, and their children. A full
analysis of the benefits of marriage to
either children or spouses is beyond the
scope of this report, but this brief
introduction should serve to highlight
the importance of the data described in
this report. This report releases estimates
of the patterns of marriage, divorce, and
remarriage in the United States as of
1995 by several important demographic
characteristics. A later report will show
more detailed estimates by a wide
variety of other characteristics.
Compared with unmarried people,
married men and women tend to have
lower mortality, less risky behavior,
more monitoring of health, more
compliance with medical regimens,
higher sexual frequency, more
Acknowledgments
The 1995 National Survey of Family Growth was jointly planned and funded primarily by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), the
National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), the Office of Population Affairs (OPA), and the National Center for HIV,
STD and TB Prevention (NCHSTP), with additional support from the Children’s Bureau.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of Wayne E. Johnson, Ph.D., of the NCHS Office of Research and Methodology
(ORM) for assistance in estimating standard errors of the statistics in this report.
The authors also gratefully acknowledge the helpful review and comments of Christine Bachrach, Ph.D. (NICHD). This report was edited by
Klaudia Cox and typeset by Annette F. Holman of the Publications Branch, Division of Data Services.
Number 323 + May 31, 2001
satisfaction with their sexual lives, more
financial savings, and higher wages
(1–3). The differences between married
and unmarried people may reflect a
causal effect of marriage or a selection
effect (healthier people may be more
likely than others to find mates and to
marry). Research has suggested that the
benefits of marriage may be partially
due to a selection effect and partially
due to true benefits to be gained from
being married as opposed to being
unmarried (3,4). A lower mortality risk
among those who are married has been
shown to persist even after health in
early adulthood was controlled. This
suggests that at least part of the benefit
of being married is not the result of
selection (4).
Compared with married individuals,
divorcees exhibit lower levels of
psychological well-being, more health
problems and greater risk of mortality,
more social isolation, less satisfying sex
lives, more negative life events, greater
levels of depression and alcohol use,
and lower levels of happiness and
self-acceptance (5). The economic
consequences of divorce can be severe
for women. Most often, children remain
with the mother after divorce; the loss
of the ex-husband’s income often results
in a severe loss of income per capita
(6,7). For men, the retention of income
combined with decreased family size
may actually result in an increase in his
new household’s income per capita
(6,8).
Adverse outcomes accrue to
children of divorce and children raised
in single-parent families. Although not
all single-parent families are the result
of divorce and not all divorced mothers
remain single, virtually all children of
divorce spend some time in a single-
parent household until the mother
remarries. Even when the mother does
remarry, studies suggest that children in
stepfamilies are similar to children in
single-parent families: both groups of
children do worse than children living
with two parents in terms of academic
achievement, depression, and behavior
problems such as drug and alcohol
abuse, premarital sexual intercourse, and
being arrested (9).
Compared with two-parent families,
single-parent families demonstrate lower
levels of parental involvement in school
activities and lower student achievement
(10). Children raised in single-parent
families are more likely to drop out of
high school, have lower grades and
attendance while in school, and are less
likely to attend and graduate from
college than children raised in two-
parent families (11). They are more
likely to be out of school and
unemployed and are more likely to
become single parents than children
raised in two-parent families (11).
Studies have found that compared with
children in two-parent families, children
of divorce score lower on measures of
self-concept, social competence,
conduct, psychological adjustment, and
long-term health (5).
The positive health benefits of
marriage and the negative consequences
of divorce illustrate the importance of
examining trends and differentials in the
patterns of marriage and divorce over
time.
Trends and differences in
marriage and divorce
In the United States in the second
half of the twentieth century, the
proportion of people’s lives spent in
marriage declined due to postponement
of marriage to later ages, greater
incidence of never marrying, and higher
rates of divorce. The increase in
nonmarital cohabiting has also
contributed to the decline in the
proportion of people’s lives spent in
marriage. Increasing rates of
cohabitation have largely offset
decreasing rates of marriage (12,13).
The proportion of time spent in
marriage has varied across demographic
subgroups. Since 1950, the marital
patterns of white and black Americans
have diverged considerably. About
91 percent of white women born in the
1950’s are estimated to marry at some
time in their lives, compared with only
75 percent of black women born in the
1950’s (12). Black married couples are
more likely to break up than white
married couples, and black divorcees are
less likely to remarry than white
divorcees (12).
The degree of attachment to
marriage among black Americans is
similar to that of white Americans as
measured by attitudes towards marriage
(14,15). One prominent explanation
offered by some researchers for the
lower proportion of time spent in
marriage among black Americans is the
idea of a ‘‘marriage squeeze,’’ in which
the ‘‘marriageable pool’’ of black men is
low due to high rates of joblessness,
incarceration, and mortality (16–18).
Employed men are more likely than
unemployed men to marry (19).
In addition to race and employment
status, other characteristics of
individuals that have been found to be
related to the probability of marriage
include education and earnings (20),
intact status of family of origin, and
parents’ educational levels (21). Other
characteristics of individuals related to
the probability of divorce include age at
marriage, education, birth cohort (22),
religion, marriage cohort, fertility status
at marriage (23), premarital cohabitation
(24), and premarital sexual activity (25).
Other characteristics related to the
probability of remarriage include
education and age at divorce (26) and
presence of children from prior
marriages (9,22).
The lower economic prospects of
less-educated young men has been
hypothesized to decrease the probability
of marriage. The increasing economic
independence of women has also been
hypothesized to decrease the probability
of marriage, although recent evidence
suggests that the increasing economic
independence of women may actually
increase the probability of marriage
because earnings and employment may
make either partner an attractive
potential spouse (16,20). Marriage
market conditions may also play a role
in that the probability of divorce is
higher in areas with large numbers of
economically attractive potential
alternate partners (16).
A full analysis of all the individual
and community-level characteristics
associated with marriage and divorce is
beyond the scope of this report. This
report releases estimates of the patterns
of marriage, divorce, and remarriage in
the United States as of 1995 by a few
important demographic characteristics.
A later report will show more detailed
2 Advance Data No. 323 + May 31, 2001
estimates by a wide variety of other
characteristics.
Methods
Data
The national estimates of marriage
and divorce patterns in this report are
based on data from the 1995 National
Survey of Family Growth (NSFG).
Cycle 5 of the NSFG, conducted by the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention’s National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS), was based on a
multi-stage probability sample of the
civilian noninstitutionalized population
of women in the United States. This
cycle yielded estimates that are
representative of women 15–44 years of
age in 1995. Between January and
October 1995, in-home computer-
assisted personal interviews (CAPI)
were conducted with 10,847 women, of
whom 1,553 were Hispanic women,
6,483 were white non-Hispanic women,
2,446 were black non-Hispanic women,
and 365 were women of other races and
ethnic origins. The overall response rate
was 79 percent (27).
The sample list for the 1995 NSFG
was selected from households that
responded to the 1993 National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS). Black and
Hispanic women were sampled at higher
rates than were other women. Sampling
weights account for differential
probabilities of sample selection and for
nonresponse and are adjusted to agree
with control totals by age, race, parity,
and marital status provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau. The 10,847 women in
the 1995 NSFG represent the 60 million
women 15–44 years of age in the
civilian noninstitutionalized population
of the United States in 1995. On
average, each woman in the 1995 NSFG
represents about 5,500 women in the
population, although sample weights
vary considerably from this average
value depending on the respondent’s
race, age, and Hispanic ethnicity; the
response rate for similar women; and
other factors (27,28). See the Technical
notes for additional information.
The 1995 NSFG collected complete
retrospective histories of each woman’s
experiences with marriage and divorce,
including the beginning and ending
dates of each marriage and the outcome
of each marriage (separation, divorce,
widowhood) (29). Given these data, the
probabilities of first marriage disruption,
of divorce after separation, of
remarriage after divorce, and of second
marriage disruption can be estimated
using life table techniques.
Previous analyses of marriage and
divorce based on vital statistics have
computed and presented rates of
marriage and divorce (30, 31). Rates are
snapshots of data limited to specific
time points. The life table analysis in
this report takes a life-cycle approach to
estimate the probabilities that:
(a) a first marriage will end in
separation or divorce,
(b) a separation will result in
divorce,
(c) a divorce from a first marriage
will be followed by remarriage, and
(d) a second marriage will end in
separation or divorce.
Previous analysis of divorce and
remarriage based on cycle 4 of the
National Survey of Family Growth used
a measure of the cumulative proportion
of marriages disrupted as of interview to
describe the phenomena (32). An
improvement over a rate, this statistic
approximates the estimates that life table
analysis provides. However, it is only a
single measure of the cumulative
proportion at the time of interview; life
tables provide estimates of cumulative
proportions at every time point in the
life course of a marriage.
Life tables
The life table is a tool that
demographers most often use to study
mortality, but it is often applied to the
study of marital stability. In studying
mortality, the cohort life table is a
summary of the mortality history of a
given cohort from birth to death and
requires data on the longevity of all
cohort members, a span of more than
100 years. As a result, the period life
table is typically used as a model of
what would happen to a given cohort if
the age-specific death rates from a
certain point in time were to remain
fixed for the duration of the cohort’s life
(33,34).
As members of the cohort age, they
are subjected to the age-specific death
rates of successive age categories in the
life table. At each interval, the age-
specific death rate for that interval is
used to calculate how many members of
the cohort die during that interval. That
number of deaths is subtracted from the
count of cohort members, and the result
is the number of cohort members who
survive and are counted in the next
interval. Eventually, the last age interval
is reached and the last cohort members
die. One overall measure of longevity is
the proportion who survive to specific
ages (33). Survivor curves can be
plotted that show the proportion of the
cohort surviving to each successive age
category (34,35).
To apply life table analysis to the
study of marital stability, the cohort of
people is replaced with a cohort of
marriages; age is replaced by marital
duration, and death is replaced by
separation or divorce. In addition, one
other issue must be addressed. The
sample of women is limited to ages
15–44 years, so the marriage histories
are incomplete. For respondents whose
marriage has not yet ended as of the
time of the interview, the end date of
the marriage is unknown. Therefore, the
duration of the marriage is unknown and
is referred to in statistical literature as
‘‘censored.’’ Life table procedures allow
for the simultaneous analysis of both
complete and incomplete marriage
histories (22).
Life table analysis can handle
censored cases by keeping such cases in
the analysis as long as they are at risk
of disruption and then dropping them
out once the risk is unknown (36). For
example, when calculating the
proportion of marriages that dissolve in
each duration interval, a marriage that
has existed for 24 months and is still
intact at the time of the interview would
remain in the denominator for each
duration interval until 24 months of
duration is reached, at which point the
case would no longer be used in the
calculations.
Widowhood removes a marriage
from the risk of dissolution. The length
of time that the marriage would have
endured intact if the husband had not
died is unknown, so cases of
Advance Data No. 323 + May 31, 2001 3
