AUTISM IN CHILDREN BORN VERY-PRETERM FROM
AGE 2 TO 4 YEARS
Margo Pritchard1*
, Therese de Dassel2
, Elaine Beller3
, Fiona
Bogossian4
, Linda Johnston5
, Jessica Paynter6
, Santo
Russo7
, James Scott8
1
Australian Catholic University, the 2
Royal Brisbane Women’s
Hospital, the 3
Bond University, the 4
University of Queensland,
the 5
University of Toronto, the 6
Griffith University, the 7
Better
Life Psychology, the 8
University of Quensland
Background: Although children born very preterm are at
increased risk of autism, the diagnostic stability in these children
is unknown.
Objective: This study aimed to determine the diagnostic stability of Autism using the Autism Diagnostic Observation ScheduleGeneric (ADOS-G) classifications in children born very-preterm
from age 2 to 4 years’ corrected age (CA).
Methods: Child-survivors born < 29 weeks’ gestation were
enrolled at age 2 years in a hospital-based prospective longitudinal Autism study. Measures included the Modified Checklist of
Autism in Toddlers-Follow-up Interview (M-CHAT-FI™), ADOS-G
and developmental assessments. The ADOS-G was conducted on
toddlers who screened positive on the M-CHAT-FI™. Outcomes
were assessed at ages 2 and 4 years.
Results: Data were available on 85% (74/87) of VPT children
aged 4 years. Two children were diagnosed with ASD at age
2 years and five children at age 4 years. Of these, both children
diagnosed at age 2 years as well as three new cases were assessed
as having autism at age 4 years. Of the three new cases identified
at age 4 years one was subthreshold at age 2 years whilst two
had lower developmental scores at age 4 years.
Conclusion: In this first longitudinal study of autism in very
preterm children, autism identified at 2 years persisted however,
incident cases emerged between 2 and 4 years. This demonstrates
the need for ongoing diagnostic vigilance for autism in young
children born very preterm.
THE PARENT CHILD RELATIONSHIP IN CHILDREN
WITH AUTISM BORN VERY PRETERM
Margo Pritchard1*
, Peter Gray2
, Linda Johnston3
, Fiona
Bogossian4
, Therese de Dassel5
, Jessica Paynter6
, Santo
Russo7
, Elaine Beller8
, James Scott9
1
Australian Catholic University, the 2
Mater Mothers’ Hospital,
the 3
University of Toronto, the 4
University of Queensland,
the 5
Royal Brisbane Women’s Hospital, the 6
Griffith University,
the 7
Better Life Psychology, the 8
Bond University,
the 9
University of Quensland
Background: Despite the high rates of autism reported in prematurity, its impact on parenting has not been examined. Understanding these differences may assist in identifying the foci of
intervention and providing targeted support.
Objectives: This study aimed to examine the incidence and
type of parenting relationship problems in children with autism
born very preterm.
Methods: Two birth cohorts of toddlers (2 and 4 years old)
each recruited over 12 months and born at <29 weeks’ gestation
were administered the Modified Checklist of Autism in Toddlers–
Follow-up Interview (M-CHAT-FI); the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic (ADOS-G); standard psychometric measures for developmental-delay (including cognition, language,
adaptive behaviour; and the Parenting Relationship
Questionnaire-Preschool (PRQ-P) (including five domains;
attachment, involvement, discipline practices, parenting confidence and relational frustration.
Results: Data were available on 86% (165/192) of children of
whom 13% screened positive (including 1.8% confirmed diagnostically) with autism, 22% were classified with a parenting
relationship problem and 31.5% had a developmental delay.
Children in the autism group had statistically more parenting
relationship risk and developmental delay (p < 0.001). On multivariable analysis only parenting confidence remained significant
(p < 0.001) even after adjusting for psychosocial risk and child
development.
Conclusions: Children born very preterm with ASD are at a
four-time increased risk of parenting relationship problems, with
parenting confidence a significant factor that may impact child
outcome.
A MODEL OF INDIVIDUALISED, FAMILY FOCUSED
ANTENATAL CARE: FINDINGS FROM THE CONTINUITY
OF CARE (CoCo) STUDY
Kim Psaila1*
, Sue Heath2
1
Western Sydney University, the 2
PEARLS Team, Westmead
Hospital
Background: Diagnosis to birth of a baby with congenital
abnormalities requiring surgery, is stressful for families. High
quality evidence identifies negative maternal and neonatal consequences of pregnancy related stress. High level midwifery and
neonatal support and continuity of care is central to their experience and outcomes. Limited research exists on current service
and care pathways for families facing admission of their babies to
NICU. This paper describes the model of care developed by the
PEARLS team (Westmead Hospital) in partnership with GCNC
(Children’s Hospital Westmead). Findings from the maternity
service pathway will be reported.
Methods: The CoCo study, a mixed methods design, gained
the perspectives of families and clinicians on the nature and
extent of continuity of care within and across maternity and neonatal services, focusing on the provision of individualised, family
focused care.
Results: Maternity services, prior to care provision by the
PEARLS team, were perceived by families as problematic regarding information provision, service timing and communication.
Families described a ‘journey of looking for opinions’ after realising the path offered was ‘not the path’ they wanted to take. Once
admitted to PEARLS, families reported a ‘contrast in support’,
encouraged to ‘consider positive outcomes’ and ‘supported in our
decisions’. Participants described coordination as ‘a breath of
fresh air’ making the experience ‘a little less stressful’.
Conclusions: Provision of individualised, family focused antenatal and neonatal care offers an opportunity for services and
professionals to collaborate to reduce negative consequences of
pregnancy related stress associated with antenatal diagnosis of
fetal anomaly.
Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 53 (Suppl. 2) (2017) 3–117
© 2017 Paediatrics and Child Health Division (Royal Australasian College of Physicians)
81
Abstracts