SPECIAL ARTICLE
Family Violence: Impact on Children
JAVAD H. KASHANI, M.D., ANASSERIL E. DANIEL, M.D., ALISON C. DANDOY, M.A.,
AND WILLIAM R. HOLCOMB, PH.D.
Abstract. Violence within the family is increasingly being recognized as a serious societal problem in the
United States. Four types of family violence are discussed: violence toward children, siblings, women, and the
elderly. This paper explores the development of violent relationships in the family from both biological and
psychological perspectives, with the latter encompassing four frameworks-the psychopathological model, the
social learning model, the aversively stimulated aggression concept, and systems theory. The authors also examine
the risk factors for and the effects of violence as well as the characteristics of the aggressor and the victim. Available
intervention strategies for various types of violent behavior are then discussed. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc.
Psychiatry, 1992,31,2:181-189. Key Words: family violence, family abuse, child abuse.
Righteous Heaven, who has permitted
All this woe: What fatal crime
Was by me, e' en at the time
Of my hapless birth, committed?
(Calderon, in Feuerbach, 1832)
As a result of increasing public awareness and statutory
enforcement, family violence has gained much attention during the past few years. The identification of the widespread
prevalence of child abuse in the early 1960s was followed
by the recognition of other types of violence within the
family, such as spouse and elder abuse.
Although investigations in this area are relatively recent,
familial violence has been recognized since ancient times.
In 1985, a medical team of paleopathologists identified a
much greater incidence of fractures among women (up to
50%) than among men (up to 20%) in mummies that were
2,000 to 3,000 years old. The fractures were found to result
from lethal blows presumably the result of "peacetime personal violence" (Dickstein, 1988). Historians have also documented the activities of Theodora, Justinian's empress and
Accepted April 24, 1991.
Dr. Kashani is Professor of Psychiatry, Psychology, Pediatrics,
and Medicine; Director ofTraining in Child Psychiatry; and Director
of Children's Services at Mid-Missouri Mental Health Center. Dr.
Daniel is Associate Professor ofPsychiatry, aforensic child psychiatrist, and Superintendent ofMid-Missouri Mental Health Center. Ms.
Dandoy is a research assistant. Dr. Holcomb is Clinical Associate
Professor ofPsychiatry and Psychology, a forensic psychologist, and
Administrator ofRiverside Hospital. All are affiliated with the University of Missouri-Columbia.
The authors would like to thank lames M. A. Weiss, M.D., Professor
and Chairman ofthe Department ofPsychiatry, University ofMissouri-Columbia, and Bruce Harry, M.D., Associate Professor, for their
critical comments about the manuscript.
Reprints requests to Dr. Kashani, Department of Psychiatry, University of Missouri-Columbia, 3 Hospital Drive, Columbia, MO
65201.
0890-856719213102-0181$03.0010©1992 by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
l.Am.Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
coleader of Byzantium from A.D. 508 to 548, as a strong
advocate of women's causes; she was one of the first to
urge the prevention of physical abuse of women by their
husbands.
Spouse and child abuse-the most common forms of domestic violence-were both legal early in this century. According to the Old English common law doctrines, wife
beating was permitted for the purpose of "correcting behavior deemed inappropriate by husbands." For example, the
Rule of Thumb Law permitted a husband to beat his wife
with a stick no larger than the circumference of his thumb.
As recently as the early 1970s, a Pennsylvania town ordinance prohibited a husband from beating his wife after 10
P.M. or on Sundays (Williams-White, 1988).
The magnitude of family violence is emphasized in a
report by the Department of Justice, which states that there
were at least 4.1 million cases of family violence between
1973 and 1981, an average of 450,000 per year (Department
of Justice, 1984). The Department also added that the reported figure was probably significantly lower than the actual number of cases, because the estimates reflect only
behavior that victims are willing to report as criminal to
survey interviewers.
Definition
No consensus has been reached regarding the appropriate
definitions of "violence" and "abuse." Although these
terms are often used interchangeably, it is important to note
that violent behavior and abusive behavior often exhibit
distinct characteristics.
Harrington (1972) defined violence as an "endpoint in a
continuum of aggressive behavior." This typically consists
of hostile beating, slapping, hitting, and other physically
aggressive behavior. The American Psychiatric Association
task force on the' 'Clinical Aspects of the Violent Individual" (American Psychiatric Association, 1974) defined the
violent person as one' 'who acts or has acted in such a way
as to produce physical harm or destruction."
Abuse has been defined as " ... mistreatment, ipjury,
insulting or coarse language; to hurt by treating b¥t(y ..."
181
KASHANI ET AL.
(Daniel and Kashani, 1983). Abusive behavior may be psychological or attitudinal and hence may be nonviolent in
nature.
Emery (1989) suggests that an "abusive" or "violent"
act comprises not an objective decision but rather a social
judgment. For example, spanking and pushing have been
regarded as forms of parent-child violence and spouse
abuse, respectively. In actuality, acts such as spanking may
not be severe; thus, unclear definitions of violence and abuse
can lead to erroneous conclusions. For this paper's purposes,
the terms "abuse" and "violence" are used interchangeably
because the authors will be referring to a physical and violent
act.
The current review will outline developmental issues of
violence within various theoretical frameworks. Four types
of family violence will be described as well as associated
risk factors and effects. Finally, the paper will conclude with
intervention strategies.
Development of Violent Relationships
Biological perspective. Violent behavior has been associated with various biological factors. Researchers have examined genetic determinants, central nervous system damage,
endocrine systems, neurotransmitters, chromosomal aberrations, and structural and electrical elements in the brain to
better understand the genesis and expression of violence
(Burrowes et aI., 1988).
Human studies on the genetic aspects of aggression have
been primarily directed toward chromosomal abnormalities
such as XXX, XXY, and XYY patterns. The only finding
to date among XXY women has been a high incidence of
mental retardation. Because a high frequency of XYY men
among institutionalized populations was discovered in the
1980s, some researchers have purported that the extra Y
chromosome is related to violent behavior (Goldstein, 1974).
Schiavi et aI. (1984) studied behaviors among XYY and
XXY men and found no correlation between these genetic
abnormalities and violent traits. Nielsen et aI. (1973) reviewed profiles of XYY probands and found that although
XYY men were more impulsive in their decision making,
more "hot-tempered," and often lower in intelligence than
their peers, no positive relationship was documented between the XYY genotype and violent acts.
Various hormonal imbalances are also associated with the
onset of violent behavior. For example, aggressive behavior
has been linked to high testosterone levels, but the hormone's specific role in violence has not yet been determined.
Mattsson et aI. (1980) found higher immune plasma testosterone levels among 40 male delinquents than among normal
matched adolescents. Kruez and Rose (1972) studied aggression within a young criminal population and found that
testosterone levels did not correlate with the violent history
documented in criminal prison records.
Physical and emotional changes associated with menstrual cycles have been thought to contribute to female violent behavior. Dalton (1961) reported that 49% of all crimes
committed by women occur during menstruam and premenstruam. However, in a review of the literature linking menstruation to violent behavior, Horney (1978) reminded us
182
that data obtained retrospectively may be unreliable. Likewise, Harry and Balcer (1987) reviewed the world literature
on the relationship between menstruation and crime and
found the research to have been severely flawed methodologically; they found no evidence linking fluctuations in
reproductive hormones to criminal behavior.
The relationship between neurotransmitters and aggression is one of the most intensively studied areas in biological
psychiatry. The inhibitory neurotransmitters, y-aminobutyric
(GABA) and serotonin (5-HT) have each been associated
with aggression and impulsivity (Burrowes et aI., 1988).
One of the earliest human studies associating serotonin with
violence was conducted by Asberg et aI. (1976). These researchers found low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of 5-HIAA (a metabolite of serotonin) in patients who
attempted violent suicides, which some view as a form of
self-aggressivity (Asberg et aI., 1976).
Abnormalities of brain tissue resulting from mass lesions
or trauma may also be related to aggressive behavior. Elliot
(1982) studied 286 individuals with a history of recurrent
rage attacks. Most of them were diagnosed with adult minimal brain dysfunction. Furthermore, most had complex partial seizures. The latter problem is one of the most extensively investigated syndromes associated with violence.
Many studies have been conducted in individuals with criminal records, and the evidence points to an increased frequency of epilepsy among prison inmates, although epileptic
prisoners seem no more violent than nonepileptic prisoners
(Gunn and Bonn, 1971).
Although the preceding discussion has described pertinent
studies of the biological basis of aggressive behavior, it is
important to note that there have been few, if any, prospective investigations indicating an immediate need for biological studies. Furthermore, the complex interplay among these
variables limits our present understanding and warrants
more systematic research.
Theoretical frameworks. Four theoretical frameworks
have been advanced to explain the etiology and perpetuation
of family violence: 1. the psychopathological model, 2. the
social learning model, 3. the aversively stimulated aggression concept, and 4. systems theory.
The psychopathological model takes into account a wide
variety of intraindividual factors, such as personality and
psychiatric disorders, as determinants of family violence.
Early studies on child abuse focused on uncovering psychopathology within the parents because it was assumed that
such violent behavior must be caused by mental illness. In
the majority of cases, however, this model is not applicable
to abusive parents (Starr, 1979; Wolfe, 1985). Hence, although no one personality type is reflective of a child or a
wife abuser, many common personality types and disorders
have received attention in the literature as being associated
with violent behavior (Daniel and Kashani, 1983; Maiuro et
aI., 1988).
The social learning model explains the intergenerational
transmission of violence as learned behavior. Thus, past
experiences determine if, when, and how often aggression
is manifested. Children learn how to behave from the actions
they see in their parental role models. Although the social
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
learning model has been recognized as having much to say
about how family members are socialized into becoming
abusive, it has been criticized on the grounds that it has little
to add in terms of how people learn to inhibit violence
(Emery, 1989). The social learning theory minimizes the
role played by mediating emotional and cognitive processes.
The third model, aversively stimulated aggression, offers
a parsimonious explanation for behavior that is not learned
and that apparently has no instrumental value. Berkowitz
(1983) stated that although much aggression is maintained
through positive and negative reinforcement, the primary
goal of aversively stimulated aggression is to inflict pain;
aggression is a high probability response to a diverse set of
stimuli. Thus, the aversively stimulated aggression concept
focuses on the perpetrator's intent.
Because violence within the family is not a single causeand-effect phenomenon, a fourth framework based on systems theory has evolved. This theory proposes that dysfunctional relationships exist among violent individuals and their
interpersonal, physical, and organizational environments.
These relationships, in tum, place all members of the family
at risk for abusive or violent interactions (Daughtry, 1981).
Hence, the family is viewed as a system of individuals who
are actively engaged in reciprocal interactions with each
other. Family members are influenced in these interactions
by their roles and expectations. This theory provides a
framework for assessing how individual characteristics and
interpersonal, physical, and organizational environments interact to lead to a violent act within the family.
Violence toward Children
In 1871, a young girl in New York City was severely
beaten by her adoptive parents. Neighbors reported the
child's injuries to the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, the only available legal authority at that time.
Soon after this incident was investigated, the Society for
Prevention of Cruelty to Children was founded. However,
. it was not until 1961, when Henry Kempe described the
"battered child syndrome" at a workshop of the American
Academy of Pediatrics, that child abuse became recognized
as a widespread national problem (Kempe and Helfer, 1972).
There is still much uncertainty and debate about the extent
of child abuse. Estimates of the number of cases in the
United States range from 60,000 (Helfer and Kempe, 1974)
to 2.3 million (Straus et al., 1980). In light of the difficulties
and inconsistencies regarding the definition of child abuse,
it is not surprising that such a range of incidence estimates
exist. Furthermore, the information on which these estimates
are based comes from many sources such as social agencies,
hospitals, and police reports. All are based on different samples and different reporting criteria. Furthermore, many reports are speculative and inferential. There is general concensus, however, that cases of abuse and neglect are
significantly underreported (Williams, 1980).
Although much abuse is perpetrated by strangers, 85% of
child abuse is inflicted by a person the child knows, usually
the father or the mother. Children of all ages and demographic status are victims of physical, psychological, and
sexual abuse in their own homes, committed by parents,
J. Am. Acad. Child Ado/esc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
FAMILY VIOLENCE
step-parents, grandparents, and other family members
(Dickstein, 1988).
Effects ofabuse on the child. Although considerable attention has been focused on the perpetrators of abuse, recent
work has also focused on the children (Barahal et al., 1981;
Friedrich and Einbender, 1983; Kashani et al., 1987; Kazdin
et al., 1985; Main and George, 1985). The impact of family
violence is demonstrated in several spheres including shortterm physical, developmental, and psychiatric effects as well
as long-term effects on the intergenerational transmission of
violence, criminality, psychiatric disorders, and other psychosocial complications. Because interparental violence and
child abuse often coexist, the confounding effects of abuse
and exposure to parental violence may have a cumulative
negative effect.
An abundance of literature exists describing the psychopathology common among abused children. These outcomes
of abuse are diverse and include impaired social cognitions
(Barahal et al., 1981), low self-esteem (Friedrich and Einbender, 1983; Kashani et al., 1987), lack of empathy (Main
and George, 1985), and depression (Kazdin et al., 1985).
Symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder are also common.
Nightmares about the violence are common, and children
become anxious when reminded about it. They may also
become emotionally constricted and inhibited, and their behavior may regress. Other symptoms are sleep disorders and
irritability. Such stress also complicates the grief, because
the anxiety and intrusive images interfere with normal grieving (Pynous, 1990).
It is important to note at the outset that no single behavioral or emotional reaction epitomizes the abused child. Reaction to abuse may be influenced by other factors such as
support from other family members, intelligence, and genetic makeup. Also, the experience of being a victim of
violence may not be the sole factor for consequent difficulties that have been found among abused children; other aspects ofthe child's environment may pose a greater negative
effect.
Regarding the eventual adjustment of abused children,
Emery (1989) has proposed two types of predictions. One
set of predictions focuses on the caregiver-child relationship, more specifically, disruptions in patterns of attachment. Attachment theorists believe that disruptions in security with primary caretakers and the child's cognitive script
for relationships are the primary causes of problems found
among abused children (Sroufe and Fleeson, 1986). A second set of predictions is based on social learning theory and
suggests that abused children are more aggressive than their
nonabused peers because oftheir learning experiences. Intergenerational transmission studies support this view.
Over a quarter century ago, Curtis (1963) expressed his
concern that abused and neglected children would "become
tomorrow's murderers and perpetrators of other crimes of
violence, if they survive" (p. 386). However, in a recent
review of empirical studies investigating the intergenerational transmission of violence, Widom (1989) found surprisingly little evidence to support the claim that abuse begets abuse. Kaufman and Zigler (1987) also concluded that
acceptance of the intergenerational transmission hypothesis
183
KASHANI ET AL.
is unwarranted at present. Many of the studies are weak
methodologically and overdependent on self-report and retrospectivedata. Others fail to use baseline data from control
groups, employ insufficient sample sizes, and lack appropriate comparison groups.
To overcome these methodological problems, Widom
(1989) designed a 2-year research project that incorporated
a large sample size, unambiguous operational definitions
of abuse, a control group, a prospective design, and an
assessment of the long-term consequences of abuse. Results
of this project provided dramatic support for the notion that
violence breeds violence. In this study, physical abuse and
neglect as a child led to significantly greater violent criminal
behavior at a later point in time. However, the findings
also showed that not every abused or neglected child would
become either a delinquent, a criminal, or a violent criminal.
She concludes that the linkage between childhood victimization and later violent behavior is not universal and that
intergenerational transmission is not inevitable. For example, later criminal behavior and abuse may represent indirect
by-products of early abusive experiences, thus taking into
account the existence of other intervening variables such as
familial factors, the environment, intelligence, and social
support.
Violence toward Spouse
By definition, spouse abuse, more commonly of a woman,
is a behavior pattern that occurs in physical, emotional,
psychological, and sexual forms. Its purpose is to control
and maintain power by the abuser, usually a man (Dickstein,
1988). Women receive the greatest share of violence and
batterings, accounting for approximately 95% of all spousal
violence victims (Tilden and Shepherd, 1987).
The issue of spousal battery emerged in the late 1960s as
a consequence of the women's movement and public scrutiny of the family unit in instances of child abuse. Unlike
the response to child abuse, however, society was slow to
recognize spousal violence as a problem; women were
viewed as consenting adults, responsible for their own behavior. Also, a husband's right to control his wife through
physical force continued to be socially accepted by many.
Although not the only victims of family violence, women
are not protected by the same legislation that protects children and the elderly (Tilden and Shepherd, 1987); hence,
they are the most vulnerable.
Straus et al. (1980) conducted a study of violence in
American families in the late 1970s. In a sample of 2,143
families, 16% of the respondents indicated that some type
of violence between spouses had occurred during the preceding 12 months; moreover, at least 25% of all couples reported physical violence at some point during their marriage.
Appleton (1980) also administered an anonymous questionnaire to adult women seeking care in the emergency department of an urban general hospital. Of the 620 women who
completed the questionnaire, 219 or 35% reported having
been struck at least once by their intimate partner.
Some researchers have suggested that domestic violence
occurs in three predictable phases (Drake, 1982; Walker,
1979). In the first phase, tension between the couple builds
184
as a result of minor irritations. Verbal and minor physical
abuse occurs. When the tension exceeds the couple's coping
capabilities, an acute battering episode ensues. If beaten
severely, a woman may respond by withdrawing; this selfimposed seclusion frequently delays medical attention. The
third phase is a period of calm during which reconciliation
between the partners occurs. As this phase recedes, the tension buildup of phase one recurs and the cycle of violence
continues.
Battered women may cope by attempting to change the
spouse while retaining the relationship, abandoning the relationship, or responding with violence themselves. A few
may become assaultive and homicidal; indeed, a number of
interspousal murders are precipitated by victims. The murders are likely committed in self-defense, without premeditation (Daniel and Kashani, 1983).
Effects ofwitnessing marital violence on children. Only
recently have children who witness parental physical violence been identified as at risk for psychopathology
(Hughes, 1988). In general, results comparing characteristics
of shelter children with control children seem to depend
on the particular personality or behavioral characteristics
selected for assessment. Consistently, though, the child who
witnesses interparental aggression experiences more internalizing behavior problems, such as anxiety and depression,
than does the comparison group child (e.g., Brown et al.,
1983).
Hughes (1988) improved upon previous child witnessing
studies by dividing children into age groups, obtaining information from the children themselves as well as the mothers,
and dividing the shelter children into more homogeneous
subgroups based on whether they were subjected to multiple
abuse. Abused and nonabused child witnesses to parental
violence (residing in a shelter) were compared with children
from a similar economic background on various measures,
using information collected from mothers and self-reports.
Results showed significantly greater distress in the abusedwitness children than in the comparison group, with nonabused-witness children's scores falling between the two.
Age of the child and the type of violence were mediating
factors. Hence, physically abused children who have witnessed parental violence may be less well adjusted than
witnesses who have not been physically abused.
Children who observe wife assault may also be affected
in ways other than those revealed through standard mental
health assessment procedures. Their witnessing of violent
acts between the parents may have an impact on their selfperceived views of violence as an appropriate mean of resolving conflict (Jaffee et al., 1990). To address these issues,
a child interview form called the Child Witness to Violence
Interview was developed by Jaffee and his colleagues to
better assess the presence of more subtle symptoms (Jaffee
et al., 1989). Results of research with this instrumentshowed
that latency-aged children exposed to wife battering have
more pronounced inappropriate attitudes about violence as
a means of resolving conflict than children not exposed to
violence. Furthermore, they indicate a greater willingness to
use violence themselves compared with children not exposed to wife assault. Also, these children hold themselves
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 3J:2, March J992
responsible for the violence and, in many cases, responsible
for their mother's safety.
Elder Abuse
The elderly are the most recently recognized group of
individuals as being at risk of victimization within the family. Elder abuse is very rare in cultures exhibiting a great deal
of respect for the elders as a societal norm. Unfortunately, at
times, American society tends to ignore or ridicule the older
members of the family unit, resorting to abuse as a means
of control in some cases. It is estimated that about 4% of
the elderly are victims of abuse, neglect, or exploitation
(Jaffee et aI., 1990). As with other forms of violence, however, far fewer cases appear to be reported than actually
occur.
Physical abuse of older family members includes a wide
variety of acts of both omission and commission. For example, active commission of physical abuse includes withholding of food, medicine, or assistance, overmedicating the
elderly with tranquilizers or beating to the point of severe
injury or death (Anderson, 1981).
Causes of abuse. The most widely cited risk factor in
the elder abuse literature is the resentment created by the
dependence of an older person on a caretaker (Kosberg,
1988). A study by Pillemet and Finkelhor (1989), however,
found substantially more support for the concept that abuse
is associated with personality problems rather than with
stress placed on the caregiver. According to their findings,
elder abusers appear to be severely troubled individuals with
histories of antisocial behavior and instability.
Theoretical models have been proposed to help explain
the cause of elder abuse, the primary one being the "cycle of
violence" theory discussed earlier. Johnson (1979) suggests
that the abused child, when an adult, abuses his or her parent
in return. Other theories include: the Role Theory, which is
based on the notion that aged parents put their adult children
in parental roles, but fail to release authority to them, thereby
creating psychological tension within the caregiver
(Gresham, 1976); the Family Systems Theory, which proposes that the family denies recognition of the elder parent's
problems to maintain the family system (Beck and Ferguson,
1981); and the Environmental Theory, which focuses on the
abuser's environment and personal characteristics as factors
that can lead to abusive behavior (Bottom and Lancaster,
1981).
Thus far, the impact of elder abuse upon children who
witness this violence is not well studied or documented.
However, it is likely that such behavior results in much
confusion within the child who has previously learned that
older people are to be treated with respect and kindness as
they become frail. Future studies should investigate the direct effects of elder abuse on children as well as the indirect
effects on the family system and environment as a whole.
Sibling Abuse
The high frequency of imitation and interaction among
siblings suggests that this relationship is of developmental
importance, both through the direct impact of siblings upon
one another and through the indirect effects of the siblings'
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
FAMILY VIOLENCE
relationships with their parents (Dunn, 1988). Of primary
concern to parents and clinicians is the frequent aggression
and conflict exhibited between some siblings (Baskett and
Johnson, 1982).
Detailed observations within the family by Patterson
(1984,1986) revealed that siblings do indeed playa shaping
role in the development of aggressive behavior in both clinic
and normal populations. His results suggest that coercive
behavior by siblings makes a significant contribution to the
development of coercive behavior that is independent of the
contribution of parental behavior.
Effects on the child from this sibling aggressiveness are
still inconclusive. Patterson's group, however, found that
coercive behavior by a sibling toward a target child is systematically linked to impaired peer relationships in the target
child. Richman et al. (1982) reported poor relationships with
siblings to be more common in children with other behavioral problems; these researchers found that poor relationships with siblings at 4 years of age were related to other
problems existing during that time and to a clinical rating
of disturbance 4 years later.
Sexual and psychological abuse compromise other common types of sibling abuse. Parents are typically unaware
of the abuse. The effects on the sibling from sexual abuse
might mirror posttraumatic stress symptoms.
Intervention
Biological treatment. Little attention has been devoted to
the biological aspects of treatment, although there is a real
need for an increased understanding of the underlying neurophysiologic substrates of human aggression. The biological
approach to treatment seeks to modulate aggressive behavior
by altering the brain dysfunction and hormonal disturbance
through pharmacological intervention (Burrowes et aI.,
1988).
Dalton (1980) used medroxyprogesterone successfully for
three women whose cyclic criminal activity was associated
with premenstrual syndrome. However, empirical treatment
with neuroleptics, lithium, anticonvulsants, and hortnones
seems to be effective only in selected patients. XYY men
were also studied for aggressivity and 5-HIAA CSF-concentrations by Bioulac et al. (1980). Six XYY men admitted by
court order to a high security setting because of criminally
violent behavior were found to have decreased 5-HIAA CSF
levels. When treated with a serotonin precursor, five of these
six exhibited a reduction in aggressive behavior.
The use of neuroleptics in the treatment of aggressive
individuals is controversial. Similarly, the target populations
of aggressive individuals for whom lithium, benzodiazepines, or carbamazepine would be first-line treatments are
unknown. Positive results reported in the use of 13-blockers
in aggressive patients with intermittent explosive disorder
also need to be replicated (Brizer, 1988). Furthermore, if
clinicians make every effort to identify and treat the underlying psychiatric disorders, the aggressive behavior may diminish.
Other treatment approaches. The shame and secrecy associated with family violence discourages victims from talking about it, let alone seeking professional help. Efforts
185
KASHANI ET AL.
should be directed toward the identification of high-risk
individuals and families. If the family physicians or other
clinicians have any grounds for suspicion, they should inquire directly about child abuse, marital violence, criminal
history, alcoholism, and psychiatric disorders.
Reports in the literature regarding the patterns ofintervention in family violence indicate a two-tiered approach. The
first involves arresting and prosecuting family members for
violent acts, when the physical aggression is of sufficient
severity to warrant intervention (Attorney General's Task
Force on Family Violence, 1984). It is important to note,
however, that the effects of police intervention on domestic
violence are poorly understood. The second approach involves treating the abusers with the aid of mental health
systems to build adaptive coping skills (Emery, 1989). The
latter will be emphasized in the present discussion.
Violence toward children. Helfer's (1975) multidisciplinary, coordinated approach to diagnosis, treatment, and
management of child victims involves several phases. Initially, someone reports the suspected child abuse to child
protection services. The child is then taken to an emergency
room so that a medical team can determine whether or not
the injuries are accidental. In the meantime, the multidisciplinary team (social worker, nurse, attorney, coordinator,
etc.) carries out a multitude of tasks, primarily data gathering. Finally, after the case is recognized as abuse or neglect,
a planning conference is held by the team to determine the
safety of the home and to delegate various responsibilities
for team members. Although most people advocate this multidisciplinary approach, its feasibility in the treatment process has been considered at times inefficient and therefore
questionable (Cohn and Miller, 1977).
The majority of treatment programs are directed toward
working with the abusive parents (Broome and Daniels,
1987). Services are provided in an attempt to ameliorate
abusive episodes. They focus on enhancing parental
strengths and decreasing stressful environmental elements.
Interventions include involving parents in such groups as
Parents Anonymous. This organization's goal is to help individuals who abuse their children to learn more about themselves and about alternative methods of dealing with the
frustrations of parenting. It provides an atmosphere in which
acceptance of the abusing parents is maintained. Another
means of providing abusive parents with factual knowledge
about the development of children and other child care issues
is through parent education classes. These classes aim to
increase a parent's awareness of a child's needs through
discussion of mutual needs in the parent-ehild relationship
(Wolfe et aI., 1981).
Although separation from the parents and removal to another location may be the most therapeutic intervention for
most abused children, other alternatives do exist. Beezley et
al. (1976) and Kempe and Kempe (1978) describe a variety
of interventions, such as therapeutic play schools, group
therapy, day-care centers, or public schools, where adult
caregivers can foster confidence and trust within children.
Battered women. When seeking treatment for injuries,
battered women are most likely to enter the health care
system through emergency rooms because they offer 24-
186
hour service and relative anonymity (Tilden and Shepherd,
1987). Other common centers of contact include prenatal
and maternal care services, child health clinics, community
mental health centers, and family service agencies.
Clinical research has revealed some evidence that health
care providers have been somewhat neglectful in the care of
abused women; a common mistake is the failure to question
the source of the injury, or worse, to denigrate women after
abuse is uncovered (Drake, 1982). There are many factors
impeding identification and treatment: the health care staff
may be influenced by stereotypes, the right to privacy, the
right of husbands to control their wives, feelings of frustration because of the overwhelming problem, ancl/or the risk
of personal involvement (Tilden and Shepherd, 1987).
At the present time, women's shelters and self-help
groups are other options for abused women. Self-help and
advocacy programs run within the shelter foster hope. Often
the victim is encouraged to leave the marital or quasi-marital
situation and is provided with legal help. Because the abusive situation gives way to feelings of hopelessness, confusion, and learned helplessness, these self-help groups facilitate an attitude of taking charge through enhanced decision
making. Psychiatrists should take an active role in these
facilities to improve the efficacy of such programs.
Violent men. Adams (1986) has developed a profeminist
effective treatment paradigm for male abusers entitled The
Emerge Program. It is based on confronting men's excuses
for violence while simultaneously helping to increase the
costs of that violence. The legal system is involved initially
to ensure that the men enter and complete treatment, which
consists of individual sessions followed by group therapy.
During the 9- to 12-month group therapy program, men
may learn to accept responsibility for their behavior and to
change sexist beliefs.
Adams and Penn (1979) note that the practice of selfassertion and other skills alone will not necessarily induce
batterers to stop their battering. These authors also state
that such programs must be accompanied by legal sanctions
against continued violence as well as specific attention to
the abusers' inherent sexist expectations and behavior. It is
essential for mental health professionals not to undermine
the effective role that the legal system plays in dealing with
abusive men.
Child witnesses of violence between parents. Only recently have child witnesses to spousal violence begun to
receive attention (Pynous and Eth, 1986). Most of the programs have focused on the value of a group approach that
aids children in coping with the trauma and allows them to
mutually support each other (Alessi and Hearn, 1984; Wilson et aI., 1989). Also, women's shelters are now becoming
staffed with child care workers to deal with needs of the
children in the shelter (Jaffee et aI., 1990).
At the level of prevention, four suggestions have been set
forth (Emery, 1982). First, parents should attempt to keep
children out of their angry disagreements so that the parents
do not become models of violent interactions. Second, parents should try to agree in front of their child(ren) about
discipline. Third, parents should make a special effort to
maintain their individual relationship with each child, bel. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2. March 1992
cause this may buffer the child from interparental conflict.
Finally, more parents need to be aware that spousal conflicts
can have negative effects on their children.
There are inherent difficulties in developing appropriate
programs for the child of the abused mother. Although children exposed to violence between parents seem to be "at
risk" for future behavior problems and require the help of
mental health professionals, it may be premature to develop
treatment programs before causative factors are identified
and outcome research on model programs has been completed. This difficulty in understanding the impact of witnessing family violence on a child's development warrants
prospective studies in the hopes of preventing future generations of violent husbands and battered wives (Jaffee et aI.,
1986).
Elders. Violence toward elders can be prevented by making families more aware of the problems of the elderly and
the options available for their care. Because many families
are financially unable to place their older relatives in nursing
homes, in-home services, such as home health agencies,
should be used so that the care provider does not need to
carry the burden alone (Pollick, 1987).
Legal intervention is limited by the law. Most states have
developed adult protective service programs, and individuals
who wish to take action against elder abuse may seek recourse through a state's criminal and civil laws.
The study cited earlier, by Pillemer and Finkelhor (1989),
found that elder abuse is associated more with personality
problems of the caregiver than with the actual burden of
care and that stress placed on the caregiver has important
treatment implications. Whereas elder abuse treatment programs generally emphasize in-home, long-term care services
and caregiver support groups, results from the Pillemer and
Finkelhor study suggest the need for other interventions that
are oriented toward relationships in which the abuser is the
dependent party. Such services could be instituted to reduce
abuser dependence. For example, adult children could be
assisted in finding employment and separate housing. Psychiatric intervention, greater police involvement, and legal
assistance may also be necessary to deter the perpetrators
from abusing their elders.
As for the victim, benefit could be derived from services
similar to those offered to young battered women. Emergency shelters for elder abuse victims would provide safety.
Support groups would also be useful for the victims by
offering them alternatives, helping to break the bonds of
dependence.
Conclusion
The home environment is the basis for our view of ourselves and others as well as society and the world in general.
Maladaptive interactions within the family unit will thus
have negative consequences on a global scale. Psychiatrists,
as expert mental health professionals, and their professional
organizations need not only to recognize this very significant
phenomenon but also to bring it to the attention of government authorities, lawmakers, educators, and the public. Psychiatrists have an important role to play, not least because
the law enforcement system inevitably seeks the help of
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
FAMILY VIOLENCE
mental health professionals. Whether psychiatrists' patients
are court referred or not, the response of the professional
may be characterized as a law enforcement type ofresponse.
It is imperative that all professionals who encounter people
who are in battering relationships address the violence as a
type of behavior that is against the law and cannot be tolerated by a civilized society (Lerman, 1989). If the United
States is to have less criminal violence as well as better
mental health inside and outside the home, then the crucial
role of family interaction must be taken seriously.
Because those individuals with few social support networks tend to exhibit high levels of verbal and physical
aggression (Kashani and Shepperd, 1990), mental health
researchers may direct their attention toward the quality and
quantity of social support provided by the extended family
and friends. Also, cultures exhibiting more adaptive family
systems might be examined to incorporate their positive
aspects into our own culture.
Communication and cooperation must be promoted between psychiatrists, health care providers, criminal justice
agencies, schools, and social service agencies. This networking may result in the identification and early intervention of high-risk individuals. Education of health professionals should include training in the identification, treatment,
and referral of victims and perpetrators (Surgeon General's
Workshop on Violence and Public Health, 1985). Finally, it
is evident that the previously described studies pertaining to
family violence have methodological weaknesses. Thus, to
increase the validity and reliability of violence research,
well-designed studies are needed in this important area.
In conclusion, it is clear that the family is the first and
most important source for the fostering of mentally healthy
individuals. The authors' plea to people everywhere is to
focus attention on this basic unit of socialization and to
develop policies and practices to support and protect the
family.
References
Adams, D. (1986), Counseling men who batter: a profeminist analysis
of clinical models. Paper presented at the American Psychiatric
Convention. Boston.
--& Penn, I. (1979, April), Groups for men: the socialization and
resocialization of men who batter. Paper presented at the American
Orthopsychiatric Association Annual Meeting, New York.
Alessi, 1. J. & Hearn, K. (1984), Group treatment of children in shelters
for battered women. In: Battered Women and Their Families, ed.
A. A. Roberts. New York: Springer.
American Psychiatric Association Task Force on Report 8: The Clinical Aspects of the Violent Individual (1974). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association.
Anderson, C. L. (1981), Abuse and neglect among the elderly. Journal
of Gerontologic Nursing, 7:77-85.
Appleton, W. (1980), The battered wife syndrome. Ann. Emerg. Med.,
9:84-91.
Asberg, M., Thoron, P. & Traskman, P. (1976), Serotonin depression:
biochemical subgroup with the affective disorders. Science,
191 :478-480.
Attorney General's Task Force on Family Violence. (1984), Final
report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Barahal, R. M., Waterman, J. & Martin, H. P. (1981), The social
cognitive development of abused children. J. Consult. Clin. Psycho!., 49:508-510.
Baskett, L. M. & Johnson, S. M. (1982), The young child's interactions
187
KASHANI ET AL.
with parents versus siblings: a behavioral analysis. Child Dev.,
53:643-650.
Beck, C. M. & Ferguson, D. (1981), Aged abused. Journal ofGerontologic Nursing, 7:333-336.
Beezley, P., Martin, H. P. & Alexander, H. (1976), Comprehensive
family oriented therapy. In: Child Abuse and Neglect: The Family
and the Community, eds. R. E. Helfer & C. H. Kempe. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
Berkowitz, L. (1983), Aversively stimulated aggression: some parallels and differences in research with animals and humans. Am.
Psycho!., 38: 1135-1144.
Bioulac, B., Benezech, M., Renaud, B. et a!. (1980), Serotoninergic
dysfunction in the 47 XYY Syndrome. Bio!. Psychiatry, 15:971-
1023.
Bottom, W. & Lancaster, J. (1981), An ecological orientation toward
human abuse. Family and Community Health, 4:1-10.
Brizer, D. A. (1988), Psychopharmacology and the management of
violent patients. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am., 11:551-563.
Broome, M. E. & Daniels, D. (1987), Child abuse: a multidimensional
phenomenon. Holistic Nursing Practice, 2: 13-24.
Brown, A. J., Pelcovitz, D. & Kaplan, S. (1983), Child witnesses of
family violence: a study of psychological correlates. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association.
Anaheim, CA.
Burrowes, K. L., Hales, R. E. & Arrington, E. (1988), Research
on the biologic aspects of violence. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am.,
11 :499-509.
Cohn, A. H. & Miller, M. K. (1977), Evaluating new modes of treatment for child abusers and neglectors: the experience of federally
funded demonstration projects in the USA. Child Abuse Negl.,
1:453-458.
Curtis, G. C. (1963), Violence breeds violence-perhaps? Am. J.
Psychiatry, 120:386-387.
Dalton, K. (1961), Menstruation and crime. Br. Med. J., 2: 1752-1753.
--(1980), Cyclical criminal acts in premenstrual syndrome. Lancet,
2: 1070--1071.
Daniel, A. E. & Kashani, J. H. (1983), Women who commit crimes
of violence. Psychiatric Annals, 13:697-713.
Daughtry, C. (1981), An ecologic perspective of child abuse. In:
Understanding the Family-Stress and Change in American Life,
eds. C. Getty & W. Humphreys. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Department of Justice (1984, April 22), Special report on family
violence.
Dickstein, L. J. (1988), Spouse abuse and other domestic violence.
Psychiatr. Clin. North Am., 11 :611-628.
Drake, V. K. (1982), Battered women: a health care problem in disguise. Image, 14(2):40-47.
Dunn, J. (1988), Sibling influences on childhood development. J.
Child Psycho!. Psychiatry, 29:119-127.
Elliott, F. (1982), Neurological findings in adult minimal brain dysfunction and the dyscontrol syndrome. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.,
170:680-687.
Emery, R. E. (1982), Interpersonal conflict and the child of discord
and divorce. Psychol. Bull., 92:310--330.
--(1989), Family violence. Am. Psycho!., 44:321-328.
Friedrich, W. N. & Einbender, A. J. (1983), The abused child: a
psychological review. J. Clin. Child Psycho!., 12:244-256.
Goldstein, M. (1974), Brain research and violent behavior. Arch.
Neurol., 30:1-35.
Gresham, M. L. (1976), The infantilization of the elderly. Nursing
Forum, 15:201.
Gunn, J. & Bonn, J. (1971), Criminality and violence in epileptic
prisoners. Br. J. Psychiatry, 118:337-343.
Harrington, J. A. (1972), Violence: a clinical viewpoint. Br. Med. J.,
1:228-231.
Harry, B. & Balcer, C. M. (1987), Menstruation and crime: a critical
review of the literature from the clinical criminology perspective.
Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 5:307-321.
Helfer, R. E. (1975), Child abuse and neglect: the diagnostic process
and treatment programs. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare. Pub!. No. (ORD) 75-69.
188
--& Kempe, C. H. (eds.) (1974), The Battered Child (2nd Edition).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Homey, J. (1978), Menstrual cycles and criminal responsibility. Law
and Human Behavior, 2:25-36.
Hughes, H. H. (1988), Psychological and behavioral correlates of
family violence in child witnesses and victims. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry, 58:77-90.
Jaffee, P. G., Hurley, D. J. & Wolfe, D. (1990), Children's observations of violence: I. Critical issues in child development and intervention planning. Can. J. Psychiatry, 35:466-470.
--Wilson, S. K. & Wolfe, D. (1989), Specific assessment and
intervention strategies for children exposed to wife battering: preliminary empirical investigation. Canadian Journal of Community
Mental Health, 7:157-163.
--Wolfe, D., Wilson, S. K. & Zak, L. (1986), Family violence
and child adjustment: a comparative analysis of girls' and boys'
behavioral symptoms. Am. J. Psychiatry, 143:74-77.
Johnson, D. G. (1979), Abuse and neglect-not for children only!
Journal of Gerontologic Nursing, 5:11-13.
Kashani, J. H. & Shepperd, J. (1990), Aggression in adolescents:
The role of social support and personality. Can. J. Psychiatry,
35:311-315.
--Shekim, W.O., Burk, J. P. & Beck, N. C. (1987), Abuse as a
predictor of psychopathology in children and adolescents. J. Clin.
Child Psychol., 16:43-50.
Kaufman, J. & Zigler, E. (1987), Do abused children become abusive
parents? Am. J. Orthopsychiatry, 57:186-192.
Kazdin, A. E., Moser, J., Colbus, D. & Bell, R. (1985), Depressive
symptoms among physically abused and psychiatrically disturbed
children. J. Abnorm. Psycho!., 94:298-307.
Kempe, C. H. & Helfer, R. E. (1972), Helping the Battered Child and
His Family. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Kempe, R. S. & Kempe, C. H. (1978), Child Abuse. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kosberg, J. I. (1988), Preventing elder abuse: identification of high
risk factors prior to placement decisions. The Gerontologist,
28:43-50.
Kruez, L. E. & Rose, R. M. (1972), Assessment of aggressive behavior
and plasma testosterone in a young criminal population. Psychosom.
Med., 34:321-332.
Lerman, L. B. (1989), Enforcing the law against wife abusers: the
role of mental health professionals. In: Family Violence: Emerging
Issues ofa National Crisis, eds. L. J. Dickstein & C. C. Nadelson.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, Inc.
Main, M. & George, C. (1985), Responses of abused and disadvantaged toddlers to distress in agemates: a study in a day care setting.
Developmental Psychology, 21:407-412.
Maiuro, R. D., Cahn, T. S., Vitaliano, P. P. et a!. (1988), Anger,
hostility, and depression in domestically violent versus generally
assaultive men and nonviolent control subjects. J. Consult. Clin.
Psycho!., 56: 17-23.
Mattsson, A., Schalling, D., Olweus, D. et al. (1980), Plasma testosterone, aggressive behavior, and personality dimensions in young male
delinquents. J. Am. Acad. Child Psychiatry, 19:476-490.
Nielsen, J., Christensen, A., Schultz-Larsen, J., et al. (1973), A psychiatric-psychological study of patients with the XYY syndrome found
outside of institutions. Acta Psychiatr. Scand., 49:159-168.
Patterson, G. R. (1984), Siblings: fellow travellers in coercive family
processes. Advances in the Study ofAggression, 1:173-214.
--(1986), The contribution of siblings to training for fighting: a
microsocial analysis. In: Development ofAntisocial and Prosocial
Behavior: Research, Theories, and Issues, eds. D. Olweus, 1.
Block & M. Radke-Yarrow. New York: Academic Press, pp. 235-
261.
Pillemer, K. & Finkelhor, D. (1989), Causes of elder abuse: caregiver
stress versus problem relatives. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry, 59: 179-
187.
Pollick, M. F. (1987), Abuse of the elderly: a review. Holistic Nursing
Practice, 2:43-53.
Pynous, R. S. (1990), What are the effects of children who witness
violent acts? Harvard Mental Health Letter, vol. 6, no. 12.
--Eth, S. (1986), Special intervention programs for child witnesses
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992
to violence. In: Violence in the Home: Inter-Disciplinary Perspectives, ed. M. Lystad. New York: BrunnerlMazel, pp. 193-218.
Richman, N., Stevenson, J. & Graham, P. (1982), Pre-school to
School: A Behavioral Study. London: Academic Press.
Schiavi, R., Theilgaard, A., Owen, D. et al. (1984), Sex chromosome
anomalies, hormones, and aggressivity. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry,
41:93-99.
Sroufe, L. A. & Fleeson, J. (1986), Attachment and the construction
of relationships. In: Relationships and Development, eds. W.
Hartup & Z. Rubin. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 51-72.
Starr, R. H. (1979), Child abuse. Am. Psycho/., 34:872-878.
Straus, M., Gelles, R. & Steinmetz, S. K. (1980), Behind Closed
Doors: Violence in the American Family. Garden City, NY: Anchor
Press.
Surgeon General's Workshop on Violence and Public Health (1985,
October), Recommendations for the working group (unpublished
report).
Tilden, V. P. & Shepherd, P. (1987), Battered women: the shadow
side of families. Holistic Nursing Practice, 1:25-32.
FAMILY VIOLENCE
Walker, L. E. (1979), The Battered Woman. New York: Harper and
Row.
Widom, C. S. (1989), The cycle of violence. Science, 244:160-166.
Williams, G. J. (1980), Child abuse and neglect: problems of definition
and incidence. In: Traumatic Abuse and Neglect of Children at
Home, eds. G. J. Williams & J. Money. Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, pp. 1-5.
Williams-White, D. (1988), Self-help and advocacy: an alternative
approach to helping battered women. In: Family Violence, eds.
L. 1. Dickstein & C. C. Nadelson. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press, Inc.
Wilson, S., Cameron, S., Jaffee, P. et al. (1989), Children exposed to
wife abuse: an intervention model. Social Casework: The Journal
of Contemporary Social Work, 70:180-184.
Wolfe, D. A. (1985), Child-abusive parents: an empirical review and
analysis. Psycho/. Bull., 97:462-482.
--Sandler, J. & Kaufman, K. (1981), A competency based parenttraining program for child abusers. J. Consult. Clin. Psycho/.,
49:633--640.
Coming in May:
From Abuse to Violence: Psychophysiological Consequences of Maltreatment
Dorothy Otnow Lewis
Special Section: Ethical Issues in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Guest Editor: David Fassler
Attention Deficit Disorder with and without Hyperactivity
Dennis P. Cantwell and Lorian Baker
Children in the Colorado Adoption Project at Risk for CO
Hilary Coon et al.
ODD and CO: Issues to Be Resolved for DSM-IV
Benjamin Lahey et al.
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 31:2, March 1992 189