WHY CHILDREN FROM THE SAME FAMILY
ARE SO DIFFERENT FROM ONE ANOTHER
A Darwinian Note
Martin L. Lalumi~re, Vernon L. Quinsey
and Wendy M. Craig
Queen's University at Kingston
The well-established finding that siblings growing up in the same family
turn out to be very different from one another has puzzled psychologists
and behavior geneticists alike. In this theoretical note we describe the
possible ontogeny and phylogeny of a sibling differentiation mechanism. We suggest that sibling competition for parental investment results
in sibling differentiation on a number of characteristics, producing different developmental trajectories within families. Variations in developmental trajectories within families may have had fitness advantages in
ancestral environments because (a) sibling competition for extrafamilial
resources would be reduced and (b) these variations would be suited to
environments containing a variety of niches or to changing environments. Predictions derived from this model and an example of an application to attachment theory are presented.
KEY WORDS: Behavior genetics; Development; Evolution; Family;
Individual differences; Nonshared environment; Parental
investment; Siblings.
Received August 15, 1995; accepted December 21, 1995.
Address all correspondence to Martin L. LalumT~re, Research Department, Penetangmshene Mental Health Centre, 500 Church Street, Penetangmshene, Ontarzo, Canada,
L9M 1G3. E-mail: martm@pavlov.psyc.queensu.ca
Copyright 9 1996 by Walter de Gruyter, Inc., New York
Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 281-290. 1045-6767/96/$1.00 + .10
281
282 Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1996
Behavior geneticists have brought a reliable yet unexpected finding to
the attention of the scientific community: Biological siblings raised in the
same family are likely to be as different from one another as any two
children taken at random, even though these siblings are more similar to
each other genetically and are reared together. This finding applies to a
large array of characteristics in the domains of personality, physiology,
psychopathology, and cognitive abilities (for reviews see Hetherington
et al. 1994; Plomin and Daniels 1987; Rowe 1994).
The source of sibling differences has been termed "nonshared environment." Nonshared environment includes any post-zygote influences
that are not shared by siblings (within-family variance). Nonshared environment explains up to 35% of the phenotypic variance in personality
and cognitive abilities. By way of comparison, genetic variance accounts
for 40 to 50% and shared environment (between-family variance) accounts for 5% of the phenotypic variance (Locurto and Freeman 1994).
The remainder of the variance is attributable to measurement error.
Growing up in the same family appears to make biological siblings different rather than similar.
Such a puzzling phenomenon invites two types of questions. The first
concerns the ontogenic process that creates within-family differences.
This issue has received most of the attention of researchers (e.g., Dunn
and Plomin 1991; Locurto and Freeman 1994; Plomin and Daniels 1987;
Scarr and Grajek 1982; Schachter 1982; Smith 1993), and there seems to
be general agreement that the causes of within-family variation are to be
found outside the family (e.g., Harris 1995; Lynn et al. 1989; but see
Dunn and Plomin 1991; Sulloway 1995). For example, Rowe (1994:7)
recently asserted: "I share with other behavior geneticists (Scarr 1992)
the position that parents in most working- to professional-class families
may have little influence on what traits their children will eventually
develop as adults."
The second question concerns the possibility that an evolutionary
adaption underlies this variation. Perhaps surprisingly, this possibility
has not received much attention from behavior geneticists. In response
to Buss's (1987) suggestion to use the principles of evolutionary biology
to understand the findings of behavior geneticists, the purpose of this
theoretical note is to suggest possible answers to these two questions
from a Darwinian perspective and to stimulate discussion.
ONTOGENY
According to a Darwinian view, individuals compete for limited resources associated with growth, survival, and reproduction. The man-
Sibling Differentiatmn 283
her in which the competition takes place and the resources that are
sought are determined by the particular evolutionary history of a given
species. Individuals compete with members of other species, with conspecifics, and with kin.
Within multi-child families, siblings compete for the same resource,
parental investment. Trivers (1972:139) defines parental investment as
"any investment by the parent in an individual offspring that increases
the offspring's chance of surviving (and hence reproductive success) at
the cost of the parent's ability to invest in other offspring." Parental
investment is by definition limited, and siblings attempt to maximize
their share (Trivers 1974). Parents do not indiscriminately invest in their
children (as commented in the same context by Buss 1987; see also Daly
and Wilson 1980), and to the extent that investment is discriminate,
sibling competition is expected.
Differential parental solicitude is likely associated with initial differences among siblings on characteristics related to survival and reproduction. These initial differences can be explained by genetic differences,
age, order of birth, or sex of offspring. Initial differences on a given
characteristic, such as verbal or athletic ability, may give one child an
advantage over the other, and the less skilled child may have to display
a different or additional type of ability or propensity to receive an equivalent share of parental attention. 1 In this process siblings are steered
towards different developmental trajectories.
As would be expected from this family dynamic, studies report that
differences in sibling characteristics are related to variation in parental
behavior and that siblings do not perceive their familial environment in
the same way. More important, measures of psychological adjustment
correlate with measures of parental treatment within the family (Daniels
and Plomin 1985; Daniels et al. 1985; Dunn et al. 1990; Lytton 1980;
Plomin et al. 1988). Although more research is needed, research on
siblings supports the view that sibling differentiation may occur within
the family as an outcome of initial differences among siblings and discriminative parental solicitude. 2
PHYLOGENY
Sibling differentiation may have had Darwinian consequences in ancestral environments. We suggest that sibling differentiation may steer siblings toward different developmental trajectories, and to the extent that
these different trajectories produced average fitness gains superior to
the average gain of multiple copies of a single trajectory in ancestral
environments, the process underlying differentiation may have been
284 Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1996
selected for and refined. Thus, sibling differentiation, begun as a byproduct of ontogenic competition for parental investment, may have
been maintained and furthered by its long-term fitness effects.
Selection may have favored processes producing developmental specialization contingent upon one's characteristics and the characteristics
of one's siblings in ancestral environments for two reasons. First, specialization would have reduced competition for extrafamilial resources
among siblings, leading to a sort of "passive" cooperation. Second, developmental specialization would have been advantageous in the context of stable environments that contained a number of niches or in the
context of rapidly changing environments. It is thus possible to imagine
a gene or a set of genes coding for a within-family process that would
support the development of meaningful variations among offspring on
personality and other characteristics associated with different, specialized developmental trajectories. In terms of its ultimate function this
process is similar in one respect to sexual reproduction in that it is "used
in the face of an uncertain future" (Daly and Wilson 1983:65), but it
allows the maintenance of individual genotypic structures. One example
of variation in developmental trajectories is the allocation of male energy
to status competition or to early mating attempts (e.g., Belsky et al.
1991).
Thus, competition for limited resources within the family may exaggerate sibling differences on a number of characteristics. These differences may lead to different developmental trajectories having an impact
on extrafamilial status/resource competition and acquisition. To the extent that variation in developmental trajectories resulted in a greater
number of reproducing offspring in ancestral environments, the process
underlying variation would have been favored by natural selection.
PREDICTIONS
This model of sibling differentiation leads to a very specific and counterintuitive prediction: Siblings should grow more dissimilar the more time
they spend together in the same family. Contemporary socialization
theories would predict exactly the opposite (see Maccoby and Martin
1983). Naturally occurring experiments where twins are separated during the first few years of life offer a test of this prediction. Johnson
(1963), Pedersen et al. (1985), and Vandenberg and Johnson (1968) report
that the length of time twins were reared in the same family was nega~
tively related to similarity in cognitive abilities (but see Bouchard 1983,
who found no relation). Pedersen et al. (1992:261-262) found for some
personality measures, such as extraversion, agreeableness, and open ~
Sibling Differentzatzon 285
ness to experience, that "twins separated earlier, with the greatest separation or for the longest time were more similar than those pairs separated later, with the least separation or separated for the shortest time."
This line of research suggests that the people who should be most different from each other are unrelated individuals reared together.
Another prediction is that the characteristics most likely to be susceptible to influence by an evolved within-family differentiation process
should be those more closely associated with particular developmental
trajectories than those more generally associated with reproductive and
survival success. For example, within a given sample, personality characteristics such as impulsivity and extroversion may show more withinfamily variability than a general factor of intelligence or characteristics
such as height and weight (for support of this hypothesis see Lynn et al.
1989; McCartney et al. 1990; Pedersen et al. 1984).
One consideration in predicting sibling differences is that the process
generating sibling differentiation should be sensitive not only to initial
sibling characteristics but to extrafamilial contexts as well. For example,
developmental trajectories supporting cooperative behavior should still
be more likely to be observed in environments in which cooperative
endeavors are rewarded. Incidentally, antisocial tendencies show more
shared-environment effects than many other traits or characteristics in
behavior genetics studies (Lykken 1995).
Finally, the differentiation process should affect boys more strongly
than girls because males in general compete with each other more than
females for access to mates (Clutton-Brock and Vincent 1991), often
through competition for within-group status. Within-sex competition
often leads to the selection of alternative strategies (Trivers 1985), and
sons should thus be more strongly subject to the differentiation process.
Schachter (1982) reports greater same-sex than opposite-sex "deidentification" but did not distinguish by sex; Rowe et al. (1992) report larger
effects of nonshared environment (birth order) on delinquency for
brothers than for sisters or opposite-sex siblings. Braungart-Rieker et al.
(1995) report greater shared-environment effects on behavior problems
for girls than for boys. More research is needed to test sex differences in
sibling differentiation directly.
APPLICATION TO ATTACHMENT THEORY
One potential application of a Darwinian perspective on sibling differences is to attachment theory. As noted by Baumeister and Leary
(1995:499), competition for limited resources, such as parental investment, provides "a powerful stimulus to forming interpersonal connec-
286 Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1996
tions." A number of studies on attachment have found that early attachment patterns, such as secure, anxious-avoidant, ambivalent, and disorganized, influence later development, particularly with regard to
vulnerability or resistance to psychopathology (for a review see Goldsmith and Alansky 1987). In general, securely attached children have
advantages later in life (i.e., are more competent, sociable, flexible, resilient) than children with other kinds of attachment (Radke-Yarrow et
al. 1995). The recognized attachment patterns and the observed developmental stability are likely cross-cultural (Wartner et al. 1994). A Darwinian perspective invites exploration of how variations in attachment
histories relate to adult adaptations to varied putative ecological/social
niches.
Radke-Yarrow et al. (1995) found that developmental outcomes are
affected by attachment history in interaction with environmental context. Under some environmental conditions, secure attachment is less
protective than insecure attachment. For example, insecure attachment
to a mother with bipolar depression is associated with an absence of
problematic anxiety six years later, whereas secure attachment is associated with clinical depression. It is thus possible that under particular
environmental conditions, such as low maternal support, siblings with
different attachment histories compete less for limited resources. In the
same vein, Chisholm (1996) argues that variations in attachment patterns may be alternative responses part of a facultative strategy and
related to differences in life histories.
It is thus possible that the nature of parent-offspring attachment is one
of the developmental triggers that traject offspring toward different
niches. Very little is known about sibling differences in attachment history, and this Darwinian model may offer a theoretical framework for its
investigation.
CONCLUSION
Even though shared environmental influence has been found to have
little impact on child development, the source of sibling differentiation
may be a result of an intrafamilial process. At the same time, the nature
and the extent of sibling differentiation should be influenced by the
context of the family and the broader social environment.
Little is known about sibling differentiation in other species. Also,
little is known about variations in development in humans from a functional perspective; sibling differentiation in humans has been mainly
studied in the psychopathological tradition. We hope this Darwinian
Sibling Differentiation 287
approach will stimulate research and theorizing on a possible intrafamilial process underlying sibling differentiation and on the possible
adaptive functions of within-family variation.
Preparation of this article was supported by a Research Fellowship from the
Correctional Service of Canada and by the Kingston Psychiatric Hospital.
Thanks to Jill Atkinson, Gail Hepburn, and Michael Seto for their helpful comments and suggestions.
Martin Laluml~re received his Masters in Psychology from the Umverslt6 de Montr6al m
1990 and his Ph D. from Queen's Umversity at Kingston in 1995. He began his research
career as a Research Fellow in Psychology and Psychiatry at Queen's University and
recently moved to a research position at the Penetanguishene Mental Health Centre. His
research interests include sexual preferences, paraphilias, mating strategies, juvenile delinquency, antisocial behavior, and psychopathy.
Vern Quinsey received his Ph.D. in experimental psychology from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1970. He was Director of Research at the Mental Health Centre in
Penetanguishene, Ontario Since 1988, he has been a Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry at Queen's Umverslty. His research interests include criminal violence, sexual offending, and evolutionary theory.
Wendy Craig received her Ph.D m chmcal-developmental psychology from York Umverslty m Toronto m 1993. After completing postdoctoral research at the Universlt6 de Montr6al, she became an Assistant Professor at Queen's Umverslty in 1994. Her research
interests include bullying and victimization, aggressive behavior m childhood and adolescence, and juvemle delinquency
NOTES
1. Parental investment can take many forms, such as time and energy devoted to care, allocation of physical resources, etc. Differential parental investment can also take subtle forms: Spangler et al. (1994) show that mother
sensitivity to infant behavior can alter adrenocortical functions. This suggests
that the process underlying sibling differentiation can involve not only behavior
modification through contingent reward and punishment, but physiological
modification through parental responsiveness.
2. One reviewer pointed out the interesting possibility that the process underlying sibling differentiation may also involve prenatal influences. Negative
parity effects, for example, show that male neurodevelopment is affected by the
number of previous male offspring born by the same mother. As noted by
Gualtieri and Hicks (1985:431), "successive pregnancies are not independent
events.., there exists a kind of 'memory' in the phenomenon of reproduction.
The fate of one pregnancy influences, even predicts, the outcome of the next."
Differential maternal solicitude could thus begin in utero. Prenatal, perinatal,
and neonatal effects that are specific to each offspring would also be included as
nonshared environmental variance in behavior genetics studies (Rowe 1994).
288 Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1996
REFERENCES
Baumeister, R. F., and M. R. Leary
1995 The Need to Belong: Desire of Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation. Psychological Bulletin 117:497-529.
Belsky, J., L. Steinberg, and P. Draper
1991 Childhood Experience, Interpersonal Development, and Reproductive
Strategy: an Evolutionary Theory of Socialization. Child Development 62:647-
670.
Bouchard, T. J.
1983 Do Environmental Similarities Explain the Similarity in Intelligence of
Identical Twins Reared Apart? Intelligence 7:175-184.
Buss, D. M.
1987 Evolutionary Hypotheses and Behavioral Genetic Methods: Hopes for a
Union of Two Disparate Disciplines. Behavzoral and Brain Sciences 10:20.
Braungart-Rieker, J., R. D. Rende, R. Plomin, J. C. DeFries, and D. W. Fulker
1995 Genetic Mediation of Longitudinal Associations Between Family Environment and Childhood Behavior Problems. Development and Psychopathology 7:233-245.
Chisholm, J. S.
1996 The Evolutionary Psychology of Attachment Organization. Human Nature 7:1-37.
Clutton-Brock, T. H., and A. C. J. Vincent
1991 Sexual Selection and the Potential Reproductive Rates of Males and
Females. Nature 351:58-60.
Daly, M., and M. Wilson
1980 Discriminative Parental So|icltude: a Biological Perspective. Journal of
Marriage and the Family 42:277-288.
1983 Sex, Evolutzon, and Behavzor. Belmont, California: Wadsworth.
Daniels, D., and R. Plomin
1985 Differential Experience of Siblings in the Same Family. Developmental
Psychology 21:747-760.
Daniels, D., J. Dunn, F. F. Furstenberg, and R. Plomln
1985 Environmental Differences within the Family and Adjustment Differences within Pairs of Adolescent Siblings. Ch~lcl Developmevt 56:764-774.
Dunn, J., and R. Plomin
1991 Why Are Sibhngs So Different? The Sigmficance of Differences in Sibling Experiences within the Family. Family Process 30:271-283.
Dunn, J., C. Stocker, and R. P|omm
1990 Nonshared Experiences within the Family: Correlates of Behavioral
Problems in Middle Childhood. Development and Psychopathology 2:271-
283.
Goldsmith, H. H., and J. A. Alansky
1987 Maternal and Infant Temperamental Predictors of Attachment: A
Meta-Analytic Review. Journal of Consulting and Chnical Psychology 55:805-
816.
Sibling Differentiation 289
Gualtieri, T., and J. A. Hicks
1985 An Immunoreactive Theory of Selective Male Affliction. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 8:427-441.
Harris, J. H.
1995 Where Is the Child's Environment? A Group Socialization Theory of
Development. Psychological Review 102:458-489.
Hetherington, E. M,, D. Reiss, and R. Plomin
1994 Separate Social Worlds of Siblings. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Johnson, R. C.
1963 Similarity in IQ of Separated Identical Twins as Related to Length of
Time Spent in Same Environment. Child Development 34:745-749.
Locurto, C., and M. Freeman
1994 Radical Behaviorism and the Problem of Nonshared Development. Behavior and Philosophy 22:1-21.
Lykken, D. T.
1995 The Antisocial Personalities. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Lynn, R., S. Hampson, and E. Agahi
1989 Genetic and Environmental Mechanisms Determining Intelligence,
Neuroticism, Extraversion and Psychoticism: An Analysis of Irish Siblings.
British Journal of Psychology 80:499-507.
Lytton, H.
1980 Parent-Child Interactzons: The Socialization Process Observed in Twin and
Singleton Famihes. New York: Plenum.
Maccoby, E. E., and J. A. Martin
1983 Socialization in the Context of the Family: Parent-Child Interaction. In
Handbook of Cluld Psychology, E. M. Hetherington, ed. Pp. 1-102. New York:
Wiley.
McCartney, K., M. J. Harris, and F. Bermen
1990 Growing up and Growing Apart: A Developmental Meta-Analysis of
Twin Studies. Psychological Bulletin 107:226-237.
Pedersen, N. L., L. Friberg, B. Floderus-Myrhed, G. E. McClearn, and R. Plomin
1984 Swedish Early Separated Twins: Identification and Characterization.
Acta Geneticae Medicae et Gemellologiae 33:243-250.
Pedersen, N. L., G. E. McClearn, R. Plomin, and L. Friberg
1985 Separated Fraternal Twins: Resemblance for Cognitive Abilities. Behavior Genetics 15:407-419.
Pedersen, N. L., G. E. McClearn, R. Plomin, and J. R. Nesselroade
1992 Effects of Early Rearing Environment on Twin Similarity in the Last Half
of the Life Span. Brutish Journal of Developmental Psychology 10:255-267.
Plomin, R., and D. Daniels
1987 Why Are Children in the Same Family So Different from One Another?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:1-60.
Plomin, R., G. E. McClearn, N. L. Pedersen, J. R. Nesselroade, and C. S. Bergeman
1988 Genetic Influence on Childhood Family Environment Perceived Retrospectively from the Last Half of the Life Span. Developmental Psychology
24:738-745
290 Human Nature, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1996
Radke-Yarrow, M., K. McCann, E. DeMulder, B. Belmont, P. Martinez, and D. T.
Richardson
1995 Attachment in the Context of High Risk Conditions. Development and
Psychopathology 7:246-265.
Rowe, D. C.
1994 The Limits of Famdy Influence: Genes, Experwnce, and Behavior. Guildford
Press.
Rowe, D. C., J. L. Rodgers, and S. Meseck-Bushey
1992 Sibling Delinquency and the Family Environment: Shared and Unshared Influences. Child Development 63:59-67.
Scarr, S.
1992 Developmental Theories for the 1990s: Development and Individual
Differences. Child Development 63:1-19.
Scarr, S., and S. Grajek
1982 Similarities and Differences among Siblings. In Sibling Relationships:
Thezr Nature and Significance across the Lzfespan, M. E. Lamb and B. SuttonSmith, eds. Pp. 357-382. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Schachter, F. F.
1982 Sibling Deidentification and Split-Parent Identihcation: A Family Tetrad. In Sibling Relationships: Their Nature and Significance across the Lifespan,
M. D. Lamb and B. Sutton-Smith, eds. Pp. 123--151. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Erlbaum.
Smith, D. D.
1993 Brain, Environment, Heredity, and Personality. Psychological Reports
72:3-13.
Spangler, G., M. Schieche, U. Ilg, U. Maier, and C. Ackermann
1994 Maternal Sensitivity as an External Organizer for Biobehavioral Regulation in Infancy. Developmental Psychobiology 27:425-437.
Sulloway, F. J.
1995 Birth Order and Evolutionary Psychology: A Meta-Analytic Overview.
Psychological Inquiry 6:75-80.
Trivers, R. L.
1972 Parental Investment and Sexual Selection. In Sexual Selection and the
Descent of Man, B. Campbell, ed. Pp. 136-179. Chicago: Aldine.
1974 Parent-Offspring Conflict. Amerzcan Zoologist 14:249-264.
1985 Social Evolution. Menlo Park: Benjamin-Cummings.
Vandenberg, S. G., and R. C. Johnson
1968 Further Evidence on the Relation between Age of Separation and Similarity in IQ among Pairs of Separated Identical Twins. In Progress in Human
Behavior Genetics, S. G. Vandenberg, ed. Pp. 215-219. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wartner, U. G., K. Grossmann, E. Fremmer-Bombik, and G. Suess
1994 Attachment Patterns at Age Six in South Germany: Predictability from
Infancy and Implications for Preschool Behavior. Child Development 65:1014-
1027. 